an open place. a camp near forres. a heath. forres. a room in the palace. inverness. a room in macbeth s castle. the same. before the castle. the same. a lobby in the castle. inverness. court within the castle. the same. the same. the same. without the castle. forres. a room in the palace. the same. another room in the palace. the same. a park or lawn, with a gate leading to the palace. the same. a room of state in the palace. the heath. forres. a room in the palace. a dark cave. in the middle, a cauldron boiling. fife. a room in macduff s castle. england. before the king s palace. dunsinane. a room in the castle. the country near dunsinane. dunsinane. a room in the castle. country near dunsinane: a wood in view. dunsinane. within the castle. the same. a plain before the castle. the same. another part of the plain. the same. another part of the field. dramatis person duncan, king of scotland. malcolm, his son. donalbain, his son. macbeth, general in the king s army. banquo, general in the king s army. macduff, nobleman of scotland. lennox, nobleman of scotland. ross, nobleman of scotland. menteith, nobleman of scotland. angus, nobleman of scotland. caithness, nobleman of scotland. fleance, son to banquo. siward, earl of northumberland, general of the english forces. young siward, his son. seyton, an officer attending on macbeth. boy, son to macduff. hecate, and three witches. lords, gentlemen, officers, soldiers, murderers, attendants and scene: in the end of the fourth act, in england; through the rest of the play, in scotland; and chiefly at macbeth s castle. an open place. enter three witches. when shall we three meet again? in thunder, lightning, or in rain? when the hurlyburly s done, when the battle s lost and won. where the place? i come, graymalkin! fair is foul, and foul is fair: a camp near forres. enter king duncan, malcolm, donalbain, lennox, with attendants, meeting a bleeding captain. what bloody man is that? he can report, as seemeth by his plight, of the revolt this is the sergeant who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought gainst my captivity. hail, brave friend! doubtful it stood; the merciless macdonwald worthy to be a rebel, for to that the multiplying villainies of nature do swarm upon him from the western isles of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied; and fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, show d like a rebel s whore. but all s too weak; for brave macbeth well he deserves that name , disdaining fortune, with his brandish d steel, which smok d with bloody execution, like valour s minion, carv d out his passage, till he fac d the slave; which ne er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, till he unseam d him from the nave to the chops, and fix d his head upon our battlements. o valiant cousin! worthy gentleman! as whence the sun gins his reflection shipwracking storms and direful thunders break, so from that spring, whence comfort seem d to come mark, king of scotland, mark: no sooner justice had, with valour arm d, compell d these skipping kerns to trust their heels, but the norweyan lord, surveying vantage, with furbish d arms and new supplies of men, dismay d not this our captains, macbeth and banquo? yes; as sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion. if i say sooth, i must report they were as cannons overcharg d with double cracks; so they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe: except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, or memorize another golgotha, i cannot tell but i am faint, my gashes cry for help. so well thy words become thee as thy wounds: go, get him surgeons. who comes here? what a haste looks through his eyes! so should he look god save the king! whence cam st thou, worthy thane? from fife, great king, norway himself, with terrible numbers, assisted by that most disloyal traitor, the thane of cawdor, began a dismal conflict; till that bellona s bridegroom, lapp d in proof, confronted him with self-comparisons, point against point, rebellious arm gainst arm, curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude, great happiness! that now sweno, the norways king, craves composition; nor would we deign him burial of his men till he disbursed at saint colme s inch go pronounce his present death, i ll see it done. what he hath lost, noble macbeth hath won. a heath. enter the three witches. where hast thou been, sister? sister, where thou? a sailor s wife had chestnuts in her lap, and mounch d, and mounch d, and mounch d. give me, quoth i. aroint thee, witch! the rump-fed ronyon cries. her husband s to aleppo gone, master o th tiger: but in a sieve i ll thither sail, and, like a rat without a tail, i ll do, i ll do, and i ll do. i ll give thee a wind. th art kind. i myself have all the other, and the very ports they blow, all the quarters that they know i the shipman s card. i will drain him dry as hay: sleep shall neither night nor day hang upon his pent-house lid; weary sev n-nights nine times nine, shall he dwindle, peak, and pine: though his bark cannot be lost, yet it shall be tempest-tost. show me, show me. here i have a pilot s thumb, wrack d as homeward he did come. a drum, a drum! the weird sisters, hand in hand, posters of the sea and land, thus do go about, about: thrice to thine, and thrice to mine, and thrice again, to make up nine. peace! the charm s wound up. how far is t call d to forres? what are these, so wither d, and so wild in their attire, that look not like the inhabitants o th earth, and yet are on t? live you? or are you aught that man may question? you seem to understand me, you should be women, speak, if you can; what are you? all hail, macbeth! hail to thee, thane of glamis! all hail, macbeth! hail to thee, thane of cawdor! all hail, macbeth! that shalt be king hereafter! good sir, why do you start and seem to fear things that do sound so fair? i th name of truth, are ye fantastical, or that indeed which outwardly ye show? my noble partner you greet with present grace and great prediction of noble having and of royal hope, to me you speak not. if you can look into the seeds of time, and say which grain will grow, and which will not, speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear hail! hail! hail! lesser than macbeth, and greater. not so happy, yet much happier. thou shalt get kings, though thou be none: so all hail, macbeth and banquo! banquo and macbeth, all hail! stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more. by sinel s death i know i am thane of glamis; but how of cawdor? the thane of cawdor lives, a prosperous gentleman; and to be king stands not within the prospect of belief, say from whence you owe this strange intelligence? or why upon this blasted heath you stop our way with such prophetic greeting? speak, i charge you. the earth hath bubbles, as the water has, whither are they vanish d? into the air; and what seem d corporal, would they had stay d! were such things here as we do speak about? or have we eaten on the insane root that takes the reason prisoner? and thane of cawdor too; went it not so? who s here? the king hath happily receiv d, macbeth, the news of thy success, and when he reads thy personal venture in the rebels fight, his wonders and his praises do contend which should be thine or his: silenc d with that, in viewing o er the rest o th selfsame day, he finds thee in the stout norweyan ranks, nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, as thick as tale came post with post; and everyone did bear thy praises in his kingdom s great defence, and pour d them down before him. we are sent to give thee from our royal master thanks; only to herald thee into his sight, and, for an earnest of a greater honour, he bade me, from him, call thee thane of cawdor: in which addition, hail, most worthy thane, what, can the devil speak true? the thane of cawdor lives: why do you dress me in borrow d robes? who was the thane lives yet, whether he was combin d with those of norway, or did line the rebel with hidden help and vantage, or that with both he labour d in his country s wrack, i know not; but treasons capital, confess d and prov d, glamis, and thane of cawdor: thanks for your pains. do you not hope your children shall be kings, when those that gave the thane of cawdor to me promis d no less to them? that, trusted home, might yet enkindle you unto the crown, but tis strange: and oftentimes to win us to our harm, the instruments of darkness tell us truths; win us with honest trifles, to betray s cousins, a word, i pray you. two truths are told, i thank you, gentlemen. this supernatural soliciting cannot be ill; cannot be good. if ill, why hath it given me earnest of success, commencing in a truth? i am thane of cawdor: if good, why do i yield to that suggestion whose horrid image doth unfix my hair, and make my seated heart knock at my ribs, against the use of nature? present fears my thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, shakes so my single state of man that function is smother d in surmise, look, how our partner s rapt. if chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me new honours come upon him, like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould come what come may, worthy macbeth, we stay upon your leisure. my dull brain was wrought kind gentlemen, your pains are register d where every day i turn let us toward the king. think upon what hath chanc d; and at more time, the interim having weigh d it, let us speak till then, enough. come, friends. forres. a room in the palace. enter duncan, malcolm, donalbain, lennox and attendants. is execution done on cawdor? are not those in commission yet return d? my liege, but i have spoke with one that saw him die, who did report, that very frankly he confess d his treasons, implor d your highness pardon, and set forth nothing in his life became him like the leaving it; he died as one that had been studied in his death, to throw away the dearest thing he ow d as twere a careless trifle. there s no art to find the mind s construction in the face: enter macbeth, banquo, ross and angus. o worthiest cousin! thou art so far before, would thou hadst less deserv d; that the proportion both of thanks and payment might have been mine! only i have left to say, the service and the loyalty i owe, in doing it, pays itself. your highness part is to receive our duties: and our duties are to your throne and state, children and servants; which do but what they should, by doing everything welcome hither: i have begun to plant thee, and will labour noble banquo, that hast no less deserv d, nor must be known no less to have done so, let me infold thee there if i grow, my plenteous joys, wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves sons, kinsmen, thanes, and you whose places are the nearest, know, we will establish our estate upon our eldest, malcolm; whom we name hereafter the prince of cumberland: which honour must not unaccompanied invest him only, but signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine from hence to inverness, the rest is labour, which is not us d for you: i ll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful the hearing of my wife with your approach; so, humbly take my leave. my worthy cawdor! the prince of cumberland! that is a step on which i must fall down, or else o erleap, stars, hide your fires! the eye wink at the hand, yet let that be, which the eye fears, when it is done, to see. true, worthy banquo! he is full so valiant; let s after him, whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: inverness. a room in macbeth s castle. enter lady macbeth, reading a letter. they met me in the day of success; and i have learned by the perfect st report they have more in them than mortal knowledge. when i burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, whiles i stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the king, who all-hailed me, thane of cawdor ; by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with hail, king that shalt be! this have i thought good to deliver thee my dearest partner of greatness that thou might st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promis d thee. lay it to thy heart, and farewell. glamis thou art, and cawdor; and shalt be what thou art promis d. yet do i fear thy nature; it is too full o th milk of human kindness thou wouldst be great; art not without ambition, but without what thou wouldst highly, that wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, thou dst have, great glamis, that which cries, thus thou must do, if thou have it; and that which rather thou dost fear to do, hie thee hither, that i may pour my spirits in thine ear, and chastise with the valour of my tongue all that impedes thee from the golden round, which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem to have thee crown d withal. what is your tidings? thou rt mad to say it. is not thy master with him? who, were t so, would have inform d for preparation. so please you, it is true. our thane is coming. one of my fellows had the speed of him, who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more come, you spirits that tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, and fill me, from the crown to the toe, top-full of direst cruelty! make thick my blood, stop up th access and passage to remorse, that no compunctious visitings of nature shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between th effect and it! come to my woman s breasts, and take my milk for gall, your murd ring ministers, wherever in your sightless substances you wait on nature s mischief! come, thick night, and pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell that my keen knife see not the wound it makes, nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark to cry, hold, hold! great glamis, worthy cawdor! greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter! thy letters have transported me beyond this ignorant present, and i feel now my dearest love, and when goes hence? tomorrow, as he purposes. o, never shall sun that morrow see! your face, my thane, is as a book where men to beguile the time, look like the time; bear welcome in your eye, your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, but be the serpent under t. he that s coming must be provided for; and you shall put this night s great business into my dispatch; only look up clear; the same. before the castle. servants of macbeth attending. enter duncan, malcolm, donalbain, banquo, lennox, macduff, ross, angus the air this guest of summer, the temple-haunting martlet, does approve, by his loved mansionry, that the heaven s breath smells wooingly here: no jutty, frieze, buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird where they most breed and haunt, i have observ d see, see, our honour d hostess! the love that follows us sometime is our trouble, herein i teach you how you shall bid god ild us for your pains, all our service, in every point twice done, and then done double, were poor and single business to contend against those honours deep and broad wherewith your majesty loads our house: for those of old, and the late dignities heap d up to them, where s the thane of cawdor? we cours d him at the heels, and had a purpose to be his purveyor: but he rides well; and his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him fair and noble hostess, your servants ever have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt, to make their audit at your highness pleasure, give me your hand; conduct me to mine host: we love him highly, by your leave, hostess. the same. a lobby in the castle. enter, and pass over, a sewer and divers then enter macbeth. if it were done when tis done, then twere well if th assassination could trammel up the consequence, and catch with his surcease success; that but this blow might be the be-all and the end-all here, but here, upon this bank and shoal of time, we d jump the life to come. but in these cases we still have judgement here; that we but teach bloody instructions, which being taught, return to plague th inventor. this even-handed justice commends th ingredience of our poison d chalice he s here in double trust: first, as i am his kinsman and his subject, strong both against the deed; then, as his host, who should against his murderer shut the door, besides, this duncan hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been so clear in his great office, that his virtues will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against the deep damnation of his taking-off; and pity, like a naked new-born babe, striding the blast, or heaven s cherubin, hors d upon the sightless couriers of the air, shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, i have no spur to prick the sides of my intent, but only vaulting ambition, which o erleaps itself and falls on th other how now! what news? he has almost supp d. why have you left the chamber? hath he ask d for me? know you not he has? we will proceed no further in this business: he hath honour d me of late; and i have bought golden opinions from all sorts of people, which would be worn now in their newest gloss, was the hope drunk wherein you dress d yourself? hath it slept since? and wakes it now, to look so green and pale at what it did so freely? from this time art thou afeard to be the same in thine own act and valour as thou art in desire? wouldst thou have that which thou esteem st the ornament of life, and live a coward in thine own esteem, letting i dare not wait upon i would, like the poor cat i th adage? pr ythee, peace! i dare do all that may become a man; what beast was t, then, that made you break this enterprise to me? when you durst do it, then you were a man; and, to be more than what you were, you would nor time nor place did then adhere, and yet you would make both: they have made themselves, and that their fitness now i have given suck, and know how tender tis to love the babe that milks me: i would, while it was smiling in my face, have pluck d my nipple from his boneless gums and dash d the brains out, had i so sworn as you if we should fail? we fail? but screw your courage to the sticking-place, and we ll not fail. when duncan is asleep whereto the rather shall his day s hard journey soundly invite him , his two chamberlains will i with wine and wassail so convince that memory, the warder of the brain, shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason a limbeck only: when in swinish sleep their drenched natures lie as in a death, what cannot you and i perform upon th unguarded duncan? what not put upon his spongy officers; who shall bear the guilt of our great quell? bring forth men-children only; will it not be receiv d, when we have mark d with blood those sleepy two of his own chamber, and us d their very daggers, that they have done t? who dares receive it other, as we shall make our griefs and clamour roar upon his death? i am settled, and bend up away, and mock the time with fairest show: inverness. court within the castle. how goes the night, boy? the moon is down; i have not heard the clock. i take t, tis later, sir. hold, take my sword. there s husbandry in heaven; take thee that too. a heavy summons lies like lead upon me, merciful powers, restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature gives way to in repose! who s there? what, sir, not yet at rest? the king s abed: this diamond he greets your wife withal, by the name of most kind hostess, and shut up being unprepar d, our will became the servant to defect, all s well. i dreamt last night of the three weird sisters: to you they have show d some truth. i think not of them: yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve, we would spend it in some words upon that business, at your kind st leisure. if you shall cleave to my consent, when tis, so i lose none in seeking to augment it, but still keep my bosom franchis d, and allegiance clear, i shall be counsell d. good repose the while! thanks, sir: the like to you. go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready, get thee to bed. is this a dagger which i see before me, the handle toward my hand? come, let me clutch thee: i have thee not, and yet i see thee still. art thou not, fatal vision, sensible to feeling as to sight? or art thou but a dagger of the mind, a false creation, proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain? i see thee yet, in form as palpable thou marshall st me the way that i was going; mine eyes are made the fools o the other senses, or else worth all the rest: i see thee still; and on thy blade and dudgeon, gouts of blood, there s no such thing. now o er the one half-world nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse the curtain d sleep. witchcraft celebrates pale hecate s off rings; and wither d murder, alarum d by his sentinel, the wolf, whose howl s his watch, thus with his stealthy pace, with tarquin s ravishing strides, towards his design thou sure and firm-set earth, hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear thy very stones prate of my whereabout, and take the present horror from the time, whiles i threat, he lives. i go, and it is done. the bell invites me. hear it not, duncan, for it is a knell the same. that which hath made them drunk hath made me bold: what hath quench d them hath given me fire. hark! peace! it was the owl that shriek d, the fatal bellman, which gives the stern st good night. he is about it. the doors are open; and the surfeited grooms do mock their charge with snores: i have drugg d their possets, that death and nature do contend about them, who s there? what, ho! alack! i am afraid they have awak d, and tis not done. th attempt and not the deed hark! i laid their daggers ready; he could not miss em. had he not resembled my father as he slept, i had done t. my husband! didst thou not hear a noise? did not you speak? when? as i descended? hark! who lies i th second chamber? a foolish thought, to say a sorry sight. there s one did laugh in s sleep, and one cried, murder! that they did wake each other: i stood and heard them. but they did say their prayers, and address d them there are two lodg d together. one cried, god bless us! and, amen, the other, as they had seen me with these hangman s hands. list ning their fear, i could not say amen, when they did say, god bless us. but wherefore could not i pronounce amen ? i had most need of blessing, and amen these deeds must not be thought after these ways; so, it will make us mad. methought i heard a voice cry, sleep no more! macbeth does murder sleep, the innocent sleep; sleep that knits up the ravell d sleave of care, the death of each day s life, sore labour s bath, balm of hurt minds, great nature s second course, chief nourisher in life s feast. what do you mean? still it cried, sleep no more! to all the house: glamis hath murder d sleep, and therefore cawdor macbeth shall sleep no more! who was it that thus cried? why, worthy thane, go get some water, why did you bring these daggers from the place? they must lie there: go carry them, and smear i ll go no more: i am afraid to think what i have done; look on t again i dare not. infirm of purpose! the sleeping and the dead tis the eye of childhood if he do bleed, i ll gild the faces of the grooms withal, whence is that knocking? how is t with me, when every noise appals me? what hands are here? ha, they pluck out mine eyes! will all great neptune s ocean wash this blood clean from my hand? no, this my hand will rather the multitudinous seas incarnadine, my hands are of your color, but i shame i hear knocking at the south entry: retire we to our chamber. a little water clears us of this deed: how easy is it then! your constancy hark, more knocking. get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us be not lost to know my deed, twere best not know myself. wake duncan with thy knocking! i would thou couldst! the same. knocking within. here s a knocking indeed! if a man were porter of hell gate, he should knock, knock, knock. who s there, i th name of belzebub? here s a farmer that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow about you; here you ll sweat for t. knock, knock! who s there, i th other devil s name? faith, here s an equivocator, that could swear in both the scales against either scale, who committed treason enough for god s sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven: o, come in, knock, knock, knock! who s there? faith, here s an english tailor come hither, for stealing out of a french hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your goose. knock, knock. never at quiet! what are you? but this place is too cold i ll devil-porter it no further: i had thought to have let in some of all professions, that go the primrose way to th everlasting anon, anon! i pray you, remember the porter. was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed, that you do lie so late? faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock; and drink, sir, is what three things does drink especially provoke? marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes; it provokes the desire, but it takes away the therefore much drink may be said to be an equivocator with lechery: it makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to, and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and giving him the lie, leaves him. that it did, sir, i the very throat on me; but i requited him for his lie; and i think being too strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime, yet i made a shift to cast him. is thy master stirring? our knocking has awak d him; here he comes. good morrow, noble sir! good morrow, both! is the king stirring, worthy thane? i have almost slipp d the hour. i ll bring you to him. i know this is a joyful trouble to you; but yet tis one. i ll make so bold to call. for tis my limited service. goes the king hence today? he did appoint so. the night has been unruly: where we lay, our chimneys were blown down and, as they say, lamentings heard i th air, strange screams of death, and prophesying, with accents terrible, of dire combustion and confus d events, new hatch d to the woeful time. the obscure bird clamour d the live-long night. some say the earth was feverous, and did shake. twas a rough night. o horror, horror, horror! tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee! macbeth, lennox. what s the matter? confusion now hath made his masterpiece! most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope the lord s anointed temple, and stole thence the life o th building. what is t you say? the life? mean you his majesty? approach the chamber, and destroy your sight do not bid me speak. see, and then speak yourselves. awake, awake! murder and treason! banquo and donalbain! malcolm! awake! shake off this downy sleep, death s counterfeit, and look on death itself! up, up, and see the great doom s image. malcolm! banquo! as from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites to countenance this horror! what s the business, that such a hideous trumpet calls to parley the sleepers of the house? speak, speak! o gentle lady, tis not for you to hear what i can speak: the repetition, in a woman s ear, o banquo, banquo! our royal master s murder d! woe, alas! what, in our house? dear duff, i pr ythee, contradict thyself, had i but died an hour before this chance, i had liv d a blessed time; for, from this instant there s nothing serious in mortality. all is but toys: renown and grace is dead; the wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees what is amiss? you are, and do not know t: the spring, the head, the fountain of your blood is stopp d; the very source of it is stopp d. your royal father s murder d. o, by whom? those of his chamber, as it seem d, had done t: their hands and faces were all badg d with blood; so were their daggers, which, unwip d, we found they star d, and were distracted; no man s life was to be trusted with them. o, yet i do repent me of my fury, wherefore did you so? who can be wise, amaz d, temperate, and furious, loyal and neutral, in a moment? no man: th expedition of my violent love outrun the pauser, reason. here lay duncan, his silver skin lac d with his golden blood; and his gash d stabs look d like a breach in nature for ruin s wasteful entrance: there, the murderers, steep d in the colours of their trade, their daggers unmannerly breech d with gore. who could refrain, that had a heart to love, and in that heart courage to make s love known? help me hence, ho! why do we hold our tongues, that most may claim this argument for ours? what should be spoken here, where our fate, hid in an auger hole, may rush, and seize us? let s away. our tears are not yet brew d. look to the lady: and when we have our naked frailties hid, that suffer in exposure, let us meet, fears and scruples shake us: in the great hand of god i stand; and thence against the undivulg d pretence i fight let s briefly put on manly readiness, and meet i th hall together. what will you do? let s not consort with them: i ll to england. to ireland, i. our separated fortune where we are, there s daggers in men s smiles: the near in blood, this murderous shaft that s shot hath not yet lighted; and our safest way therefore to horse; and let us not be dainty of leave-taking, there s warrant in that theft which steals itself, when there s no mercy left. the same. without the castle. threescore and ten i can remember well, within the volume of which time i have seen hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night ha, good father, thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man s act, threatens his bloody stage: by the clock tis day, is t night s predominance, or the day s shame, that darkness does the face of earth entomb, when living light should kiss it? tis unnatural, even like the deed that s done. on tuesday last, a falcon, towering in her pride of place, was by a mousing owl hawk d at and kill d. and duncan s horses a thing most strange and certain beauteous and swift, the minions of their race, turn d wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, contending gainst obedience, as they would make tis said they eat each other. they did so; to the amazement of mine eyes, that look d upon t. how goes the world, sir, now? why, see you not? is t known who did this more than bloody deed? alas, the day! what good could they pretend? they were suborn d. malcolm and donalbain, the king s two sons, are stol n away and fled; which puts upon them gainst nature still: thriftless ambition, that will ravin up thine own life s means! then tis most like he is already nam d; and gone to scone where is duncan s body? carried to colmekill, the sacred storehouse of his predecessors, will you to scone? no, cousin, i ll to fife. well, i will thither. well, may you see things well done there. adieu! lest our old robes sit easier than our new! farewell, father. god s benison go with you; and with those that would make good of bad, and friends of foes! forres. a room in the palace. thou hast it now, king, cawdor, glamis, all, as the weird women promis d; and, i fear, thou play dst most foully for t; yet it was said it should not stand in thy posterity; if there come truth from them as upon thee, macbeth, their speeches shine why, by the verities on thee made good, may they not be my oracles as well, and set me up in hope? but hush; no more. enter macbeth as king, lady macbeth as queen; lennox, ross, lords, and attendants. here s our chief guest. if he had been forgotten, it had been as a gap in our great feast, and all-thing unbecoming. tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir, and i ll request your presence. let your highness command upon me, to the which my duties ride you this afternoon? ay, my good lord. we should have else desir d your good advice which still hath been both grave and prosperous in this day s council; but we ll take tomorrow. is t far you ride? as far, my lord, as will fill up the time twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better, i must become a borrower of the night, my lord, i will not. we hear our bloody cousins are bestow d in england and in ireland; not confessing their cruel parricide, filling their hearers but of that tomorrow, hie you to horse: adieu, goes fleance with you? ay, my good lord: our time does call upon s. i wish your horses swift and sure of foot; let every man be master of his time till seven at night; to make society the sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself till supper time alone: while then, god be with you. sirrah, a word with you. attend those men our pleasure? they are, my lord, without the palace gate. to be thus is nothing, our fears in banquo stick deep, and in his royalty of nature reigns that which would be fear d: tis much he dares; and, to that dauntless temper of his mind, there is none but he whose being i do fear: and under him my genius is rebuk d; as, it is said, mark antony s was by caesar. he chid the sisters when first they put the name of king upon me, and bade them speak to him; then, prophet-like, they hail d him father to a line of kings: upon my head they plac d a fruitless crown, and put a barren sceptre in my gripe, thence to be wrench d with an unlineal hand, if t be so, for banquo s issue have i fil d my mind; for them the gracious duncan have i murder d; put rancours in the vessel of my peace only for them; and mine eternal jewel given to the common enemy of man, to make them kings, the seed of banquo kings! rather than so, come, fate, into the list, and champion me to th utterance! who s there? now go to the door, and stay there till we call. was it not yesterday we spoke together? it was, so please your highness. well then, now have you consider d of my speeches? know that it was he, in the times past, which held you so under fortune, which you thought had been our innocent self? this i made good to you in our last conference, pass d in probation with you how you were borne in hand, how cross d, the instruments, who wrought with them, and all things else that might to half a soul and to a notion craz d say, thus did banquo. i did so; and went further, which is now do you find your patience so predominant in your nature, that you can let this go? are you so gospell d, to pray for this good man and for his issue, whose heavy hand hath bow d you to the grave, and beggar d yours forever? we are men, my liege. ay, in the catalogue ye go for men; as hounds, and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs, shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept all by the name of dogs: the valu d file distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, the housekeeper, the hunter, every one according to the gift which bounteous nature hath in him clos d; whereby he does receive particular addition, from the bill that writes them all alike: and so of men. now, if you have a station in the file, not i th worst rank of manhood, say t; and i will put that business in your bosoms, whose execution takes your enemy off, grapples you to the heart and love of us, who wear our health but sickly in his life, i am one, my liege, whom the vile blows and buffets of the world hath so incens d that i am reckless what and i another, so weary with disasters, tugg d with fortune, that i would set my life on any chance, to mend it or be rid on t. true, my lord. so is he mine; and in such bloody distance, that every minute of his being thrusts against my near st of life; and though i could with barefac d power sweep him from my sight, and bid my will avouch it, yet i must not, for certain friends that are both his and mine, whose loves i may not drop, but wail his fall who i myself struck down: and thence it is that i to your assistance do make love, we shall, my lord, though our lives within this hour at most, i will advise you where to plant yourselves, acquaint you with the perfect spy o th time, the moment on t; for t must be done tonight and something from the palace; always thought and with him to leave no rubs nor botches in the work fleance his son, that keeps him company, whose absence is no less material to me than is his father s, must embrace the fate resolve yourselves apart. i ll come to you anon. we are resolv d, my lord. i ll call upon you straight: abide within. banquo, thy soul s flight, if it find heaven, must find it out tonight. the same. another room in the palace. is banquo gone from court? ay, madam, but returns again tonight. say to the king, i would attend his leisure madam, i will. naught s had, all s spent, where our desire is got without content: tis safer to be that which we destroy, how now, my lord, why do you keep alone, of sorriest fancies your companions making, using those thoughts which should indeed have died with them they think on? things without all remedy should be without regard: what s done is done. we have scorch d the snake, not kill d it. she ll close, and be herself; whilst our poor malice but let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep better be with the dead, whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, duncan is in his grave; after life s fitful fever he sleeps well; treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing come on, gently my lord, sleek o er your rugged looks; so shall i, love; and so, i pray, be you. let your remembrance apply to banquo; present him eminence, both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while, that we must lave our honours in these flattering streams, and make our faces vizards to our hearts, o, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife! thou know st that banquo, and his fleance, lives. but in them nature s copy s not eterne. there s comfort yet; they are assailable. ere the bat hath flown his cloister d flight, ere to black hecate s summons the shard-born beetle, with his drowsy hums, hath rung night s yawning peal, there shall be done what s to be done? be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, come, seeling night, scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day, and with thy bloody and invisible hand cancel and tear to pieces that great bond which keeps me pale! light thickens; and the crow makes wing to th rooky wood. good things of day begin to droop and drowse, whiles night s black agents to their preys do rouse. thou marvell st at my words: but hold thee still; so, pr ythee, go with me. the same. a park or lawn, with a gate leading to the palace. but who did bid thee join with us? he needs not our mistrust; since he delivers now spurs the lated traveller apace, to gain the timely inn; and near approaches hark! i hear horses. give us a light there, ho! then tis he; the rest that are within the note of expectation already are i th court. almost a mile; but he does usually, so all men do, from hence to the palace gate a light, a light! tis he. stand to t. o, treachery! fly, good fleance, fly, fly, fly! thou mayst revenge o slave! who did strike out the light? was t not the way? there s but one down: the son is fled. well, let s away, and say how much is done. the same. a room of state in the palace. enter macbeth, lady macbeth, ross, lennox, lords you know your own degrees, sit down. at first ourself will mingle with society, our hostess keeps her state; but, in best time, pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends; see, they encounter thee with their hearts thanks. both sides are even: here i ll sit i th midst. be large in mirth; anon we ll drink a measure there s blood upon thy face. tis banquo s then. tis better thee without than he within. is he dispatch d? my lord, his throat is cut. that i did for him. thou art the best o th cut-throats; yet he s good that did the like for fleance: if thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil. most royal sir, fleance is scap d. then comes my fit again: i had else been perfect; whole as the marble, founded as the rock, as broad and general as the casing air: but now i am cabin d, cribb d, confin d, bound in but banquo s safe? ay, my good lord. safe in a ditch he bides, with twenty trenched gashes on his head; there the grown serpent lies; the worm that s fled hath nature that in time will venom breed, no teeth for th present. get thee gone; tomorrow we ll hear, ourselves, again. my royal lord, you do not give the cheer: the feast is sold that is not often vouch d, while tis a-making, tis given with welcome. to feed were best at home; from thence the sauce to meat is ceremony; the ghost of banquo rises, and sits in macbeth s place. sweet remembrancer! now, good digestion wait on appetite, and health on both! may t please your highness sit. here had we now our country s honour roof d, were the grac d person of our banquo present; who may i rather challenge for unkindness than pity for mischance! his absence, sir, please t your highness to grace us with your royal company? the table s full. here is a place reserv d, sir. where? here, my good lord. what is t that moves your highness? which of you have done this? what, my good lord? never shake gentlemen, rise; his highness is not well. sit, worthy friends. my lord is often thus, and hath been from his youth: pray you, keep seat; the fit is momentary; upon a thought if much you note him, you shall offend him, and extend his passion. feed, and regard him not. are you a man? ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that o proper stuff! this is the very painting of your fear: this is the air-drawn dagger which you said, o, these flaws, and starts impostors to true fear , would well become a woman s story at a winter s fire, authoris d by her grandam. shame itself! why do you make such faces? when all s done, pr ythee, see there! behold! look! lo! how say you? why, what care i? if thou canst nod, speak too. if charnel houses and our graves must send those that we bury back, our monuments what, quite unmann d in folly? if i stand here, i saw him. fie, for shame! blood hath been shed ere now, i th olden time, ere humane statute purg d the gentle weal; ay, and since too, murders have been perform d too terrible for the ear: the time has been, that, when the brains were out, the man would die, and there an end; but now they rise again, with twenty mortal murders on their crowns, this is more strange my worthy lord, do not muse at me, my most worthy friends. i have a strange infirmity, which is nothing come, love and health to all; then i ll sit down. give me some wine, fill full. i drink to the general joy o th whole table, and to our dear friend banquo, whom we miss: to all, and him, we thirst, our duties, and the pledge. avaunt! and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee! thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold; thou hast no speculation in those eyes which thou dost glare with! think of this, good peers, but as a thing of custom: tis no other, what man dare, i dare: approach thou like the rugged russian bear, the arm d rhinoceros, or th hyrcan tiger; take any shape but that, and my firm nerves shall never tremble: or be alive again, and dare me to the desert with thy sword; if trembling i inhabit then, protest me hence, horrible shadow! unreal mock ry, hence! why, so; being gone, pray you, sit still. you have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting with most admir d disorder. can such things be, and overcome us like a summer s cloud, without our special wonder? you make me strange even to the disposition that i owe, when now i think you can behold such sights, and keep the natural ruby of your cheeks, when mine are blanch d with fear. what sights, my lord? i pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse; at once, good night: stand not upon the order of your going, good night; and better health attend his majesty! a kind good night to all! it will have blood, they say, blood will have blood. stones have been known to move, and trees to speak; augurs, and understood relations, have by magot-pies, and choughs, and rooks, brought forth the secret st man of blood. what is the night? almost at odds with morning, which is which. how say st thou, that macduff denies his person at our great bidding? did you send to him, sir? i hear it by the way; but i will send. there s not a one of them but in his house i keep a servant fee d. i will tomorrow and betimes i will to the weird sisters: more shall they speak; for now i am bent to know, by the worst means, the worst. for mine own good, all causes shall give way: i am in blood stepp d in so far that, should i wade no more, returning were as tedious as go o er. strange things i have in head, that will to hand, which must be acted ere they may be scann d. you lack the season of all natures, sleep. come, we ll to sleep. my strange and self-abuse the heath. enter the three witches meeting hecate. why, how now, hecate? you look angerly. have i not reason, beldams as you are, saucy and overbold? how did you dare to trade and traffic with macbeth in riddles and affairs of death; and i, the mistress of your charms, the close contriver of all harms, was never call d to bear my part, or show the glory of our art? and, which is worse, all you have done hath been but for a wayward son, spiteful and wrathful; who, as others do, loves for his own ends, not for you. but make amends now: get you gone, and at the pit of acheron meet me i th morning: thither he your vessels and your spells provide, your charms, and everything beside. i am for th air; this night i ll spend upon the corner of the moon there hangs a vap rous drop profound; i ll catch it ere it come to ground: and that, distill d by magic sleights, shall raise such artificial sprites, as, by the strength of their illusion, he shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear his hopes bove wisdom, grace, and fear. and you all know, security is mortals chiefest enemy. hark! i am call d; my little spirit, see, come, let s make haste; she ll soon be back again. forres. a room in the palace. my former speeches have but hit your thoughts, which can interpret farther: only, i say, thing s have been strangely borne. the gracious duncan was pitied of macbeth: marry, he was dead: and the right valiant banquo walk d too late; whom, you may say, if t please you, fleance kill d, men must not walk too late. who cannot want the thought, how monstrous it was for malcolm and for donalbain to kill their gracious father? damned fact! how it did grieve macbeth! did he not straight, in pious rage, the two delinquents tear that were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? was not that nobly done? ay, and wisely too; for twould have anger d any heart alive, to hear the men deny t. so that, i say, he has borne all things well: and i do think, that had he duncan s sons under his key as, and t please heaven, he shall not they should find what twere to kill a father; so should fleance. but, peace! for from broad words, and cause he fail d his presence at the tyrant s feast, i hear, sir, can you tell where he bestows himself? the son of duncan, from whom this tyrant holds the due of birth, lives in the english court and is receiv d thither macduff is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid to wake northumberland, and warlike siward that, by the help of these with him above to ratify the work , we may again give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights; free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, do faithful homage, and receive free honours, and this report sent he to macduff? he did: and with an absolute sir, not i, the cloudy messenger turns me his back, and hums, as who should say, you ll rue the time and that well might advise him to a caution, t hold what distance some holy angel fly to the court of england, and unfold his message ere he come, that a swift blessing may soon return to this our suffering country under a hand accurs d! i ll send my prayers with him. a dark cave. in the middle, a cauldron boiling. enter the three witches. thrice the brinded cat hath mew d. thrice, and once the hedge-pig whin d. harpier cries: tis time, tis time. round about the cauldron go; in the poison d entrails throw. toad, that under cold stone days and nights has thirty-one swelter d venom sleeping got, boil thou first i th charmed pot! double, double, toil and trouble; fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble. fillet of a fenny snake, in the cauldron boil and bake; eye of newt, and toe of frog, wool of bat, and tongue of dog, adder s fork, and blind-worm s sting, lizard s leg, and howlet s wing, for a charm of powerful trouble, like a hell-broth boil and bubble. double, double, toil and trouble; fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble. scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, witch s mummy, maw and gulf of the ravin d salt-sea shark, root of hemlock digg d i th dark, liver of blaspheming jew, gall of goat, and slips of yew sliver d in the moon s eclipse, nose of turk, and tartar s lips, finger of birth-strangled babe ditch-deliver d by a drab, make the gruel thick and slab: add thereto a tiger s chaudron, for th ingredients of our cauldron. double, double, toil and trouble; fire, burn; and cauldron, bubble. cool it with a baboon s blood. o, well done! i commend your pains, and everyone shall share i th gains. and now about the cauldron sing, like elves and fairies in a ring, by the pricking of my thumbs, open, locks, whoever knocks! how now, you secret, black, and midnight hags! what is t you do? i conjure you, by that which you profess, howe er you come to know it answer me: though you untie the winds, and let them fight against the churches; though the yesty waves confound and swallow navigation up; though bladed corn be lodg d, and trees blown down; though castles topple on their warders heads; though palaces and pyramids do slope their heads to their foundations; though the treasure of nature s germens tumble all together, even till destruction sicken, answer me we ll answer. say, if thou dst rather hear it from our mouths, or from our masters? call em, let me see em. pour in sow s blood, that hath eaten her nine farrow; grease that s sweaten from the murderer s gibbet throw come, high or low; thyself and office deftly show! tell me, thou unknown power, he knows thy thought: hear his speech, but say thou naught. macbeth! macbeth! macbeth! beware macduff; dismiss me. enough. whate er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks; thou hast harp d my fear aright. but one word more. here s another, macbeth! macbeth! macbeth! had i three ears, i d hear thee. be bloody, bold, and resolute. laugh to scorn the power of man, for none of woman born then live, macduff: what need i fear of thee? but yet i ll make assurance double sure, thou shalt not live; that i may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, thunder. an apparition of a child crowned, with a tree in his hand, what is this, that rises like the issue of a king, and wears upon his baby brow the round and top of sovereignty? listen, but speak not to t. be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are: macbeth shall never vanquish d be, until that will never be: who can impress the forest; bid the tree unfix his earth-bound root? sweet bodements, good! rebellious head, rise never till the wood of birnam rise, and our high-plac d macbeth shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath yet my heart throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art can tell so much, shall banquo s issue ever reign in this kingdom? i will be satisfied: deny me this, and an eternal curse fall on you! let me know. why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this? show! show! show! show his eyes, and grieve his heart; come like shadows, so depart! a show of eight kings appear, and pass over in order, the last with a glass in his hand; banquo following. down! thy crown does sear mine eyeballs: and thy hair, thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first. filthy hags! why do you show me this? a fourth! start, eyes! what, will the line stretch out to th crack of doom? another yet! a seventh! i ll see no more: and yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass which shows me many more; and some i see horrible sight! now i see tis true; for the blood-bolter d banquo smiles upon me, what! is this so? ay, sir, all this is so: but why stands macbeth thus amazedly? come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites, i ll charm the air to give a sound, while you perform your antic round; that this great king may kindly say, where are they? gone? let this pernicious hour stand aye accursed in the calendar! come in, without there! what s your grace s will? saw you the weird sisters? no, my lord. came they not by you? no, indeed, my lord. infected be the air whereon they ride; and damn d all those that trust them! i did hear the galloping of horse: who was t came by? tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word fled to england! ay, my good lord. time, thou anticipat st my dread exploits: the flighty purpose never is o ertook from this moment and even now, to crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done: the castle of macduff i will surprise; seize upon fife; give to th edge o th sword his wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls no boasting like a fool; this deed i ll do before this purpose cool: but no more sights! where are these gentlemen? come, bring me where they are. fife. a room in macduff s castle. what had he done, to make him fly the land? you must have patience, madam. he had none: his flight was madness: when our actions do not, wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes, his mansion, and his titles, in a place from whence himself does fly? he loves us not: he wants the natural touch; for the poor wren, the most diminutive of birds, will fight, her young ones in her nest, against the owl. all is the fear, and nothing is the love; as little is the wisdom, where the flight my dearest coz, i pray you, school yourself: but, for your husband, he is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows the fits o th season. i dare not speak much further: but cruel are the times, when we are traitors, and do not know ourselves; when we hold rumour from what we fear, yet know not what we fear, but float upon a wild and violent sea each way and move i take my leave of you: shall not be long but i ll be here again. things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward my pretty cousin, blessing upon you! father d he is, and yet he s fatherless. i am so much a fool, should i stay longer, it would be my disgrace and your discomfort: sirrah, your father s dead. and what will you do now? how will you live? as birds do, mother. what, with worms and flies? with what i get, i mean; and so do they. poor bird! thou dst never fear the net nor lime, the pit-fall nor the gin. why should i, mother? poor birds they are not set for. my father is not dead, for all your saying. yes, he is dead: how wilt thou do for a father? nay, how will you do for a husband? why, i can buy me twenty at any market. then you ll buy em to sell again. thou speak st with all thy wit; and yet, i faith, with wit enough for thee. was my father a traitor, mother? ay, that he was. what is a traitor? why, one that swears and lies. and be all traitors that do so? every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged. and must they all be hanged that swear and lie? who must hang them? why, the honest men. then the liars and swearers are fools: for there are liars and swearers now, god help thee, poor monkey! but how wilt thou do for a father? if he were dead, you ld weep for him: if you would not, it were a good poor prattler, how thou talk st! bless you, fair dame! i am not to you known, i doubt some danger does approach you nearly: if you will take a homely man s advice, be not found here; hence, with your little ones. to fright you thus, methinks, i am too savage; to do worse to you were fell cruelty, heaven preserve you! whither should i fly? but i remember now i am in this earthly world, where to do harm is often laudable; to do good sometime accounted dangerous folly: why then, alas, do i put up that womanly defence, to say i have done no harm? what are these faces? where is your husband? i hope, in no place so unsanctified he s a traitor. thou liest, thou shag-ear d villain! what, you egg! young fry of treachery! he has kill d me, mother: run away, i pray you! dies. exit lady macduff, crying murder! and pursued by the england. before the king s palace. let us rather hold fast the mortal sword, and, like good men, bestride our down-fall n birthdom. each new morn new widows howl, new orphans cry; new sorrows strike heaven on the face, that it resounds as if it felt with scotland, and yell d out what i believe, i ll wail; what know, believe; and what i can redress, as i shall find the time to friend, i will. what you have spoke, it may be so, perchance. this tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, was once thought honest: you have loved him well; he hath not touch d you yet. i am young; but something you may deserve of him through me; and wisdom to offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb but i shall crave your pardon. that which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose. angels are bright still, though the brightest fell: though all things foul would wear the brows of grace, why in that rawness left you wife and child, those precious motives, those strong knots of love, without leave-taking? i pray you, let not my jealousies be your dishonours, you may be rightly just, bleed, bleed, poor country! great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure, for goodness dare not check thee! wear thou thy wrongs; the title is affeer d. fare thee well, lord: i would not be the villain that thou think st for the whole space that s in the tyrant s grasp be not offended: i think our country sinks beneath the yoke; it weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash i think, withal, there would be hands uplifted in my right; and here, from gracious england, have i offer of goodly thousands: but, for all this, when i shall tread upon the tyrant s head, or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country shall have more vices than it had before, more suffer, and more sundry ways than ever, what should he be? it is myself i mean; in whom i know all the particulars of vice so grafted that, when they shall be open d, black macbeth will seem as pure as snow; and the poor state esteem him as a lamb, being compar d not in the legions of horrid hell can come a devil more damn d i grant him bloody, luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful, sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin that has a name: but there s no bottom, none, in my voluptuousness: your wives, your daughters, your matrons, and your maids, could not fill up the cistern of my lust; and my desire all continent impediments would o erbear, that did oppose my will: better macbeth boundless intemperance in nature is a tyranny; it hath been th untimely emptying of the happy throne, but fear not yet to take upon you what is yours: you may convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, and yet seem cold the time you may so hoodwink. we have willing dames enough; there cannot be that vulture in you, to devour so many as will to greatness dedicate themselves, finding it so inclin d. with this there grows in my most ill-compos d affection such a staunchless avarice, that, were i king, i should cut off the nobles for their lands; desire his jewels, and this other s house: and my more-having would be as a sauce to make me hunger more; that i should forge quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, this avarice sticks deeper; grows with more pernicious root than summer-seeming lust; and it hath been the sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear; scotland hath foisons to fill up your will, all these are portable, with other graces weigh d. but i have none: the king-becoming graces, as justice, verity, temp rance, stableness, bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness, devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, i have no relish of them; but abound in the division of each several crime, nay, had i power, i should pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, uproar the universal peace, confound o scotland, scotland! if such a one be fit to govern, speak: fit to govern? no, not to live. o nation miserable, with an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter d, when shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, since that the truest issue of thy throne by his own interdiction stands accus d, and does blaspheme his breed? thy royal father the queen that bore thee, oft ner upon her knees than on her feet, fare thee well! these evils thou repeat st upon thyself have banish d me from scotland. o my breast, thy hope ends here! macduff, this noble passion, child of integrity, hath from my soul wiped the black scruples, reconcil d my thoughts devilish macbeth by many of these trains hath sought to win me into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me from over-credulous haste: but god above deal between thee and me! for even now i put myself to thy direction, and unspeak mine own detraction; here abjure the taints and blames i laid upon myself, i am yet unknown to woman; never was forsworn; scarcely have coveted what was mine own; at no time broke my faith; would not betray the devil to his fellow; and delight no less in truth than life: my first false speaking what i am truly, is thine and my poor country s to command: whither, indeed, before thy here-approach, old siward, with ten thousand warlike men, already at a point, was setting forth. now we ll together, and the chance of goodness why are you silent? such welcome and unwelcome things at once tis hard to reconcile. well; more anon. comes the king forth, i pray you? ay, sir. there are a crew of wretched souls that stay his cure: their malady convinces the great assay of art; but at his touch, such sanctity hath heaven given his hand, i thank you, doctor. what s the disease he means? tis call d the evil: a most miraculous work in this good king; which often, since my here-remain in england, how he solicits heaven, himself best knows, but strangely-visited people, all swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, the mere despair of surgery, he cures; hanging a golden stamp about their necks, put on with holy prayers: and tis spoken, with this strange virtue, he hath a heavenly gift of prophecy; and sundry blessings hang about his throne, see, who comes here? my countryman; but yet i know him not. my ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither. good god, betimes remove the means that makes us strangers! sir, amen. stands scotland where it did? alas, poor country, almost afraid to know itself! it cannot be call d our mother, but our grave, where nothing, but who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; where sighs, and groans, and shrieks, that rent the air, are made, not mark d; where violent sorrow seems the dead man s knell is there scarce ask d for who; and good men s lives expire before the flowers in their caps, o, relation too nice, and yet too true! what s the newest grief? that of an hour s age doth hiss the speaker; how does my wife? why, well. and all my children? the tyrant has not batter d at their peace? no; they were well at peace when i did leave em. be not a niggard of your speech: how goes t? when i came hither to transport the tidings, which i have heavily borne, there ran a rumour of many worthy fellows that were out; which was to my belief witness d the rather, for that i saw the tyrant s power afoot. your eye in scotland would create soldiers, make our women fight, be t their comfort gracious england hath lent us good siward and ten thousand men; would i could answer this comfort with the like! but i have words that would be howl d out in the desert air, what concern they? the general cause? or is it a fee-grief due to some single breast? no mind that s honest but in it shares some woe, though the main part if it be mine, keep it not from me, quickly let me have it. let not your ears despise my tongue for ever, humh! i guess at it. your castle is surpris d; your wife and babes savagely slaughter d. to relate the manner were, on the quarry of these murder d deer, merciful heaven! what, man! ne er pull your hat upon your brows. the grief that does not speak whispers the o er-fraught heart, and bids it break. my children too? wife, children, servants, all and i must be from thence! my wife kill d too? be comforted: let s make us med cines of our great revenge, all my pretty ones? did you say all? o hell-kite! all? what, all my pretty chickens and their dam at one fell swoop? i shall do so; but i must also feel it as a man: i cannot but remember such things were, did heaven look on, and would not take their part? sinful macduff, they were all struck for thee! naught that i am, not for their own demerits, but for mine, fell slaughter on their souls: heaven rest them now! let grief convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it. o, i could play the woman with mine eyes, and braggart with my tongue! but, gentle heavens, cut short all intermission; front to front, bring thou this fiend of scotland and myself; within my sword s length set him; if he scape, heaven forgive him too! come, go we to the king. our power is ready; macbeth is ripe for shaking, and the powers above receive what cheer you may; dunsinane. a room in the castle. enter a doctor of physic and a waiting-gentlewoman. i have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your when was it she last walked? since his majesty went into the field, i have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon t, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep. a great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching. in this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say? that, sir, which i will not report after her. you may to me; and tis most meet you should. neither to you nor anyone; having no witness to confirm my speech. lo you, here she comes! this is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast observe her; stand close. how came she by that light? why, it stood by her: she has light by her continually; tis her you see, her eyes are open. ay, but their sense are shut. what is it she does now? look how she rubs her hands. it is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing her hands. i yet here s a spot. hark, she speaks. i will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my out, damned spot! out, i say! one; two. why, then tis time to do t. hell is murky! fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? what need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account? yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him? do you mark that? where is she now? what, will these hands ne er be clean? no more o that, my lord, no more o that: you mar all go to, go to. you have known what you should not. she has spoke what she should not, i am sure of that: heaven knows what here s the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes of arabia will oh, oh, oh! what a sigh is there! the heart is sorely charged. well, well, well. pray god it be, sir. this disease is beyond my practice: yet i have known those which have walked in their sleep, who have died holily in their beds. wash your hands, put on your nightgown; look not so pale. i tell you yet again, banquo s buried; he cannot come out on s grave. even so? to bed, to bed. there s knocking at the gate. come, come, come, come, what s done cannot be undone. to bed, to bed, to will she go now to bed? foul whisp rings are abroad. unnatural deeds do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds god, god, forgive us all! look after her; remove from her the means of all annoyance, so, good night: my mind she has mated, and amaz d my sight. i think, but dare not speak. good night, good doctor. the country near dunsinane. enter, with drum and colours menteith, caithness, angus, lennox and the english power is near, led on by malcolm, his uncle siward, and the good macduff. revenges burn in them; for their dear causes that way are they coming. who knows if donalbain be with his brother? for certain, sir, he is not. i have a file of all the gentry: there is siward s son and many unrough youths, that even now what does the tyrant? some say he s mad; others, that lesser hate him, do call it valiant fury: but, for certain, he cannot buckle his distemper d cause now does he feel his secret murders sticking on his hands; now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach; those he commands move only in command, nothing in love: now does he feel his title hang loose about him, like a giant s robe who, then, shall blame his pester d senses to recoil and start, when all that is within him does condemn itself for being there? well, march we on, to give obedience where tis truly ow d: meet we the med cine of the sickly weal; and with him pour we, in our country s purge, or so much as it needs to dew the sovereign flower, and drown the weeds. dunsinane. a room in the castle. enter macbeth, doctor and attendants. bring me no more reports; let them fly all: what s the boy malcolm? was he not born of woman? the spirits that know all mortal consequences have pronounc d me thus: fear not, macbeth; no man that s born of woman shall e er have power upon thee. then fly, false thanes, and mingle with the english epicures: the mind i sway by, and the heart i bear, the devil damn thee black, thou cream-fac d loon! where gott st thou that goose look? there is ten thousand geese, villain? soldiers, sir. go prick thy face and over-red thy fear, thou lily-liver d boy. what soldiers, patch? death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine what soldiers, whey-face? the english force, so please you. seyton! i am sick at heart, when i behold seyton, i say! this push i have liv d long enough: my way of life is fall n into the sere, the yellow leaf; and that which should accompany old age, as honour, love, obedience, troops of friends, i must not look to have; but, in their stead, curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath, which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not. seyton! what s your gracious pleasure? what news more? all is confirm d, my lord, which was reported. i ll fight till from my bones my flesh be hack d. tis not needed yet. i ll put it on. send out more horses, skirr the country round; give me mine armour. how does your patient, doctor? not so sick, my lord, as she is troubled with thick-coming fancies, cure her of that: canst thou not minister to a mind diseas d, pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, raze out the written troubles of the brain, and with some sweet oblivious antidote cleanse the stuff d bosom of that perilous stuff which weighs upon the heart? throw physic to the dogs, i ll none of it. come, put mine armour on; give me my staff: seyton, send out. doctor, the thanes fly from me. come, sir, despatch. if thou couldst, doctor, cast the water of my land, find her disease, and purge it to a sound and pristine health, i would applaud thee to the very echo, pull t off, i say. what rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug, would scour these english hence? hear st thou of them? ay, my good lord. your royal preparation i will not be afraid of death and bane, were i from dunsinane away and clear, country near dunsinane: a wood in view. enter, with drum and colours malcolm, old siward and his son, macduff, menteith, caithness, angus, lennox, ross and soldiers, marching. cousins, i hope the days are near at hand what wood is this before us? let every soldier hew him down a bough, and bear t before him. thereby shall we shadow the numbers of our host, and make discovery we learn no other but the confident tyrant keeps still in dunsinane, and will endure our setting down before t. tis his main hope; for where there is advantage to be given, both more and less have given him the revolt, and none serve with him but constrained things, let our just censures attend the true event, and put we on the time approaches, that will with due decision make us know what we shall say we have, and what we owe. thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, but certain issue strokes must arbitrate; dunsinane. within the castle. enter with drum and colours, macbeth, seyton and soldiers. hang out our banners on the outward walls; the cry is still, they come! our castle s strength will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie were they not forc d with those that should be ours, we might have met them dareful, beard to beard, what is that noise? it is the cry of women, my good lord. the time has been, my senses would have cool d to hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir as life were in t. i have supp d full with horrors; direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts, wherefore was that cry? the queen, my lord, is dead. tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, creeps in this petty pace from day to day, to the last syllable of recorded time; out, out, brief candle! life s but a walking shadow; a poor player, that struts and frets his hour upon the stage, and then is heard no more: it is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, thou com st to use thy tongue; thy story quickly. gracious my lord, i should report that which i say i saw, but know not how to do t. well, say, sir. as i did stand my watch upon the hill, i look d toward birnam, and anon, methought, liar, and slave! let me endure your wrath, if t be not so. within this three mile may you see it coming; i say, a moving grove. if thou speak st false, upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive, till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth, i pull in resolution; and begin to doubt th equivocation of the fiend, fear not, till birnam wood do come to dunsinane; and now a wood arm, arm, and out! if this which he avouches does appear, i gin to be aweary of the sun, and wish th estate o th world were now undone. ring the alarum bell! blow, wind! come, wrack! at least we ll die with harness on our back. the same. a plain before the castle. enter, with drum and colours, malcolm, old siward, macduff and their army, with boughs. your leafy screens throw down, you, worthy uncle, shall with my cousin, your right noble son, lead our first battle: worthy macduff and we shall take upon s what else remains to do, do we but find the tyrant s power tonight, let us be beaten, if we cannot fight. make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath, the same. another part of the plain. enter macbeth. i cannot fly, but, bear-like i must fight the course. what s he that was not born of woman? such a one am i to fear, or none. what is thy name? thou lt be afraid to hear it. no; though thou call st thyself a hotter name my name s macbeth. no, nor more fearful. thou liest, abhorred tyrant. with my sword i ll prove the lie thou speak st. but swords i smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, brandish d by man that s of a woman born. enter macduff. tyrant, show thy face! if thou be st slain and with no stroke of mine, my wife and children s ghosts will haunt me still. i cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms either thou, macbeth, or else my sword, with an unbatter d edge, there thou shouldst be; by this great clatter, one of greatest note let me find him, fortune! this way, my lord; the castle s gently render d: the tyrant s people on both sides do fight; the noble thanes do bravely in the war, the day almost itself professes yours, enter, sir, the castle. the same. another part of the field. why should i play the roman fool, and die on mine own sword? whiles i see lives, the gashes turn, hell-hound, turn! of all men else i have avoided thee: but get thee back; my soul is too much charg d i have no words; my voice is in my sword: thou bloodier villain than terms can give thee out! thou losest labour: as easy mayst thou the intrenchant air with thy keen sword impress, as make me bleed: let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; i bear a charmed life, which must not yield despair thy charm; and let the angel whom thou still hast serv d tell thee, macduff was from his mother s womb untimely ripp d. accursed be that tongue that tells me so, for it hath cow d my better part of man! and be these juggling fiends no more believ d, that palter with us in a double sense; that keep the word of promise to our ear, and break it to our hope! i ll not fight with thee. then yield thee, coward, and live to be the show and gaze o th time. we ll have thee, as our rarer monsters are, painted upon a pole, and underwrit, here may you see the tyrant. i will not yield, to kiss the ground before young malcolm s feet, and to be baited with the rabble s curse. though birnam wood be come to dunsinane, and thou oppos d, being of no woman born, before my body i throw my warlike shield: lay on, macduff; and damn d be him that first cries, hold, enough! flourish. enter, with drum and colours, malcolm, old siward, ross, thanes and soldiers. i would the friends we miss were safe arriv d. some must go off; and yet, by these i see, macduff is missing, and your noble son. your son, my lord, has paid a soldier s debt: he only liv d but till he was a man; the which no sooner had his prowess confirm d in the unshrinking station where he fought, then he is dead? ay, and brought off the field. your cause of sorrow must not be measur d by his worth, for then had he his hurts before? ay, on the front. why then, god s soldier be he! had i as many sons as i have hairs, i would not wish them to a fairer death: and so his knell is knoll d. he s worth more sorrow, and that i ll spend for him. he s worth no more. they say he parted well and paid his score: and so, god be with him! here comes newer comfort. enter macduff with macbeth s head. hail, king, for so thou art. behold, where stands th usurper s cursed head: the time is free. i see thee compass d with thy kingdom s pearl, that speak my salutation in their minds; whose voices i desire aloud with mine, hail, king of scotland! hail, king of scotland! we shall not spend a large expense of time before we reckon with your several loves, my thanes and kinsmen, henceforth be earls, the first that ever scotland in such an honour nam d. what s more to do, which would be planted newly with the time, as calling home our exil d friends abroad, that fled the snares of watchful tyranny; producing forth the cruel ministers of this dead butcher, and his fiend-like queen, who, as tis thought, by self and violent hands took off her life; this, and what needful else that calls upon us, by the grace of grace, we will perform in measure, time, and place. so thanks to all at once, and to each one, whom we invite to see us crown d at scone. end of the project gutenberg ebook macbeth updated editions will replace the previous one the old editions will s. copyright law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation and you! can copy and distribute it in the united special rules, set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing project gutenberg electronic works to protect the project gutenberg project gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an ebook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use if you do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the trademark license is very you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. project gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away you may s. copyright law. redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. start: full license the full project gutenberg license please read this before you distribute or use this work to protect the project gutenberg mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work or any other work associated in any way with the phrase project gutenberg , you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project gutenberg license available with this file or online at gutenberg.org license. section 1. general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg electronic works 1.a. by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property trademark copyright agreement. if you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of project gutenberg electronic works in your if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8. 1.b. project gutenberg is a registered trademark. it may only be there are a few things that you can do with most project gutenberg electronic works see paragraph 1.c below. there are a lot of things you can do with project gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg see paragraph 1.e below. 1.c. the project gutenberg literary archive foundation the foundation or pglaf , owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project gutenberg electronic works. nearly all the individual if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the united states and you are located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, of course, we hope that you will support the project gutenberg mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg name associated with the work. you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project gutenberg license when 1.d. the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern copyright laws in most countries are if you are outside the united states, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other project gutenberg work. the foundation makes no 1.e. unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg: 1.e.1. the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full project gutenberg license must appear prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg work any work on which the phrase project gutenberg appears, or with which the phrase project gutenberg is associated is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed: you may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms gutenberg.org. if you are not located in the united states, you will have to check the laws 1.e.2. if an individual project gutenberg electronic work is s. copyright law does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder , the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in if you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase project gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 1.e.3. if an individual project gutenberg electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional terms will be linked to the project gutenberg license for all works 1.e.4. do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with project gutenberg . 1.e.5. do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project gutenberg license. 1.e.6. you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including however, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg work in a format other than plain vanilla ascii or other format used in the official version posted on the official project gutenberg website www.gutenberg.org , you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original plain vanilla ascii or other form. any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1. 1.e.7. do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg works unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9. 1.e.8. you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing project gutenberg electronic works provided that: you pay a royalty fee of 20 of the gross profits you derive from the use of project gutenberg works calculated using the method the fee is owed to the owner of the project gutenberg trademark, but he has royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare or are legally required to prepare your periodic tax returns. royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in section 4, information about donations to the project gutenberg you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing or by e-mail within 30 days of receipt that s he does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg you must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of project gutenberg works. 1.e.9. if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the manager of the project gutenberg trademark. contact the foundation as set forth in section 3 below. 1.f. 1.f.1. project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread s. copyright law in creating the project gutenberg collection. despite these efforts, project gutenberg electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or 1.f.2. limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the right of replacement or refund described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a project gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those provided in paragraph 1.f.3. you agree that the foundation, the trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or 1.f.3. limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a if you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium the person or entity that provided you if you received the work electronically, the person if the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing 1.f.4. except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you as-is , with no other warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not 1.f.5. some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the the invalidity or 1.f.6. indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone providing copies of project gutenberg electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of project gutenberg electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: a distribution of this or any project gutenberg work, b alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any project gutenberg work, and c any section 2. information about the mission of project gutenberg project gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. it volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg s goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg collection will in 2001, the project gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for project gutenberg and future to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org. section 3. information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non-profit 501 c 3 educational corporation organized under the laws of the the foundation s ein or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. contributions to the project gutenberg literary s. federal laws and your state s laws. the foundation s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, 801 596-1887. email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the foundation s website gutenberg.org contact section 4. information about donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation project gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest many small donations 1 to 5,000 are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up we do not solicit donations in locations to send gutenberg.org donate. while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff. donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. to donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org donate. section 5. general information about project gutenberg electronic works hart was the originator of the project gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be for forty years, he produced and distributed project gutenberg ebooks with only a loose network of project gutenberg ebooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in s. unless a copyright notice is included. thus, we do not most people start at our website which has the main pg search facility: www.gutenberg.org. this website includes information about project gutenberg , including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to